Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s the
start of our next three-part mini-series,
this time on the theme of “university”.
In part one, today’s episode, we’ll go on
a whirlwind journey through the history
of universities and higher education, from
the Medieval period to the present day.
In part two, we’ll zoom in and talk about
universities in the UK, the different
types of universities, what life is
like at a British university, and I’ll
share a load of my personal experience
too, as I spent a total of five years
studying at universities in the UK.
And in part three, the final part, we’ll
talk about something that said it was
a university, but was later accused of
being a complete fraud: Trump University.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
There are practically no institutions
that have survived for 1,000 years.
The Vatican City only goes back just
over 700, the “ancient” city of Machu
Picchu is not yet 600 years old, and even
sandwiches have only been around for 250.
Yet in just over 60 years’ time,
one institution will celebrate
its 1,000 year anniversary.
The University of Bologna is, by some
measures, the world’s oldest university.
It was founded in the year
1088, some 937 years ago.
If you go there today, the
university doesn’t seem very old,
or at least it doesn’t look so
different from the rest of the city.
But of course, 1,000 years
ago, it was very different.
It bore little resemblance to any modern
university: no sprawling campus, no
central library, no stone quadrangles
where students wandered around in gowns.
In fact, the “university” was more
of an idea than a formal structure;
it was really an informal gathering
of young men who congregated in
the same place and hired older,
more learned men to instruct them.
Now, before we get into how this worked
in practice, and what they were studying,
we should address the question of “why?”.
Why then, and why there?
Why do we see universities springing up
in the 11th, 12th and 13th centuries?
Why in Europe in particular?
Well, a few things were happening at once.
Europe in the 11th and 12th centuries was
finally becoming a little more stable.
Populations were growing,
towns were expanding, and
trade was starting to flourish.
In places like northern Italy,
new city-states were booming with
merchants, bankers and notaries.
These were societies that needed
contracts, charters, and legal expertise.
At the same time, something
extraordinary happened.
Through contact with the Islamic
world, in Spain, Sicily, and during
the Crusades, European scholars
rediscovered long-lost works of ancient
philosophers, physicians, and thinkers.
In Bologna, a copy of Justinian’s
Corpus Juris Civilis, the great
code of Roman law, re-emerged.
This was alongside works of Aristotle,
the great Greek physician Galen, and more.
Suddenly, there was a sophisticated body
of knowledge just waiting to be studied.
The Catholic Church
was also a huge factor.
It was the single most powerful
institution in Europe, owning vast
amounts of land, collecting taxes,
and even running its own courts.
Historically, it had been where
knowledge and learning was confined to.
Monks were practically the only group
in society that could read and write;
books had to be meticulously copied by
hand, by monks, of course, and these
sources of knowledge were kept in
monasteries, often under lock and key.
But by this point, the
church’s needs had evolved.
To manage its sprawling empire it
needed more than just monks who
could pray and copy manuscripts.
It needed educated clergy: men
trained not only in theology but
also in law, philosophy, and the
practical business of administration.
So, on the one hand you had these
booming towns and ambitious rulers
who wanted lawyers and administrators.
On the other, you had the Church demanding
skilled administrators and legal experts.
And in the middle, you had
rediscovered texts of Roman
law and classical philosophy
providing the material to study.
It was a case of right time, right place.
Now, importantly, these early
universities weren’t “founded” in
the sense we might think of today.
It wasn’t the Church or a king who
founded the University of Bologna.
It was the students themselves.
They banded together in
guilds, pooled their money, and
hired masters to teach them.
This is what “universitas” originally
meant, not “a university” as we think
of today, but a corporation of students.
And what gave these communities staying
power, the ability to continue year after
year, was recognition from the pope.
Popes issued charters granting
universities privileges, such as exemption
from local taxes, the right to be tried
in church courts, and most importantly,
the authority for their degrees to
be recognised across Christendom.
In other words, someone could take their
degree from the University of Bologna
and show it to their master in Paris,
and it would be recognised as valid.
Now, in terms of what students would
study at these universities, the
curriculum was surprisingly uniform.
A young man, and they were almost
always men, would typically begin
with what was known as the trivium:
grammar, rhetoric, and logic.
In practical terms, this meant
first mastering Latin, which
was the language of the church.
Then, mastering how to craft an
argument and deliver a speech.
And then it was logic: the art
of reason, evaluating statements
logically and systematically.
It wasn’t so different from some
of the skills that you might
have learned at university.
And once the young man had
mastered those, he would move on
to the quadrivium: arithmetic,
geometry, music, and astronomy.
Together, these seven subjects made up the
so-called “liberal arts,” which were the
foundation of medieval higher education.
After this, the most ambitious and wealthy
students could progress to the higher
faculties of law, medicine, and theology.
And, not unlike the modern
day, different universities
excelled at different subjects.
Law was especially important at Bologna,
theology dominated in Paris, and medicine
was strong in places like Salerno.
Degrees could take years, even decades,
to complete, and many students never
finished, again, not so dissimilar
to some modern universities.
And by the 13th and 14th centuries,
universities had appeared in
Oxford, Cambridge, Salamanca,
Padua, Prague, and Heidelberg.
Wherever they were founded, they became
magnets for ambitious men and symbols
of prestige for the rulers who would
often sponsor them, paying for their
fees and living expenses, with the
expectation that they would return
and serve them after they graduated.
A little like an employer today paying
for someone to go and do an MBA.
After all, for these young men, there was
a clear incentive to go to university.
Mastering Roman and canon law wasn’t
just an intellectual exercise; it was a
ticket to a career as a notary, a judge,
or an adviser to a bishop or prince.
In a society where almost all power
was mediated through law or the Church,
education became a pathway to influence,
and one that was worth paying for.
Now, although by the 14th century or
so, universities were well-established,
and there were around 50 scattered
across Europe, they still only
educated an extreme minority of
the population, so we’re probably
talking about fewer than 50,000
students at every university in total.
And most graduates would become clergyman,
priests, or some form of administrator
within the church or a city state system.
But as Europe moved into the Renaissance,
universities began to change.
Instead of focusing almost entirely
on theology and law, a new movement
of scholars known as humanists
championed the studia humanitatis:
the study of grammar, rhetoric,
history, poetry, and moral philosophy.
These were subjects drawn from the
classical world, inspired by the
rediscovery of Greek and Roman texts.
They shifted the focus away from purely
preparing men for service in the church or
the courtroom, and towards shaping a more
rounded, critical, and eloquent citizen.
Then came the Scientific Revolution,
and with it, the university became a
place not only for preserving existing
knowledge but also for producing it.
Now, this is an important
distinction to make.
For the first four to five centuries,
universities were places for
students to learn from the current
corpus of knowledge; there was
no focus whatsoever on discovery,
of challenging accepted knowledge
and research to uncover new ideas.
Science, of course, is all about
pushing human understanding forward,
questioning why the world is how it is.
If you were Galileo Galilei at
the University of Padua, in Italy,
this meant asking yourself whether
the sun goes around the Earth or
the Earth goes around the sun.
If you were Sir Isaac Newton in Cambridge,
in England, this meant asking what
causes an apple to fall from the sky.
It might sound obvious, especially
now when a large chunk of a
university lecturer’s time is
supposed to be dedicated to
research, but at the time, it wasn’t.
And by the 18th and 19th centuries,
universities were being reshaped
again, pushing them even further
towards what we see today.
In Berlin, Wilhelm von Humboldt developed
a new model: the idea that research
and teaching should go hand in hand,
that scholars should be free to pursue
knowledge wherever it might lead.
This so-called “Humboldtian” model spread
quickly and influenced universities across
Europe, and later the United States.
It is, of course, the basis for
much of modern higher education.
Universities should educate young,
curious minds, but they should also
be centres of research and discovery.
So, by this point, at the turn of the
20th century, there were something like
200 universities worldwide, depending on
exactly what you classify as a university.
The student body had also expanded,
but there were still only around
500,000 university students
worldwide, a tiny fraction of the
estimated 250 million students today.
University was still exclusive,
expensive, and an option only
for a tiny sliver of society.
This all started to change in the
post-war period, when governments
across the developed world invested
heavily in higher education.
In the United States, the GI
Bill gave returning soldiers
the chance to go to college.
In Europe, new universities
opened their doors for a
generation hungry for opportunity.
And across Asia, Africa, and
Latin America, universities
were established as symbols of
independence, progress, and modernity.
For the first time in history,
higher education was no longer
the preserve of a tiny elite.
And that brings us to the modern day.
There is no single accepted figure
for the number of universities
worldwide, with estimates ranging
from 25,000 to 50,000, educating
an estimated 250 million students.
It is, for many professions,
still an almost mandatory
requirement, making university a
necessary next step after school.
In the UK, like most countries, getting a
“good” job is significantly harder without
a university degree, and the better the
university you went to, and the better
grades you got, the more likely you are
to find a good job after graduation.
There are plenty of counter-examples
to this, of self-made millionaires
who dropped out of school and carved
their own path to success, but these
are anomalies, in the UK at least.
If you look through the CV or
Wikipedia page of almost anyone who
has achieved “career success” in some
form of professional environment, you
will almost certainly find the name
of a reputable university on there.
And in the UK, successive British
governments have pushed to get as
many young people into university
as possible, proclaiming that the
percentage of people graduating
from university is a success metric.
High = good, low = bad.
In 1997, Tony Blair famously stated
that he wanted 50% of British
young people to go to university.
At the time, it was seen as
ambitious, almost utopian
It took 20 years, but
in 2017, it happened.
50.2% of young people in the
UK went on to higher education.
And in fact, if you removed men from the
equation, the target would have been hit
much faster, as only 44% of men go on to
higher education while 57% of women do.
Now, 50% is significant, and moving above
50% means it’s something most people do.
And if it is something that
most people do, it has, by
definition, become less valuable.
And students are no longer studying
the trivium: grammar, rhetoric, and
logic, or at least, most aren’t.
There has been a boom in vocational
courses, courses that teach students
practical skills and prepare them for
a particular job or career: hospitality
management, journalism, and so on.
And the criticism of many of these
courses is that, perhaps ironically, they
don’t do a very good job at preparing
students for the professional world.
A degree in “golf management” might
sound perfect for a 17-year-old fan of
golf, but the reality is that it probably
isn’t even the best course to study if
they want to work in the golf industry.
And alongside this, we
must mention the cost.
As you might remember from episode
number 513, on the UK university
crisis, the cost of university has
expanded dramatically in the UK.
Before 1997, it was free, and it has
risen to almost €10,000 per year today.
It is expensive, and that’s before you
factor in the cost of living as a student.
Indeed, according to a report that
came out this summer, the average
student in the UK graduates with
£53,000 in debt, around €60,000.
Interestingly enough, this is actually
more than the average student in the US.
The difference is that the cost of
tuition in the US varies wildly, so
the most expensive degrees at the most
prestigious American universities can
cost over $100,000 a year, while some
universities can be completely free.
In the UK, the best university can cost
the same as the worst university, which
leads to the situation that everyone
has relatively equal high costs, but
of course, not everyone graduates with
degrees of equal value, which is something
we’ll talk more about in the next episode.
Now, to wrap up this exploration of
higher education through time, I want
to leave you with one last thought,
and that’s about things that have and
haven’t changed over the almost 1,000
years of the existence of university.
One theme is the university
student’s perpetual feeling
of not having enough money.
It’s understandable; students are,
theoretically speaking, too busy studying
to work, and with often hefty tuition
fees to pay and rent to make, history
is filled with examples of students
complaining about being short on cash.
Something that might have changed,
however, is students' priorities
about what they spend their money on.
So I’ll leave you with a quote from one
15th-century Dutch student, Desiderius
Erasmus Roterodamus, or Erasmus of
Rotterdam, as he is most commonly known.
He famously said, “When I have a little
money, I buy books; and if I have
any left, I buy food and clothes.”
If Erasmus were a student
today, I wonder whether he would
still have the same priorities…
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the history of universities.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something
new, at least something you might
not have learned at university.
As a reminder, this is part
one of a three-part mini-series
on the theme of “university”.
Next up, in part two, we’ll be talking
about universities in Britain: the
different types of universities, the
application process, university culture,
and what life is like if you choose
to study at a British university.
And in part three, we’ll also be
talking about something that called
itself a university, but got into a
lot of trouble for doing so: Trump
University, and the scandal that followed.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.